In these dark days, one good thing about fashion is the way young designers are using their platforms to enlighten, and to effect positive change. Stella Jean, Milan’s Haitian-Italian designer, forged an impressive collaboration with the organic cotton industry and artisans in the Republic of Benin in West Africa. She traced the cotton route from Benin to Brazil to Italy—a trade freighted with the appalling history of slavery. You wouldn’t necessarily have guessed at the depth of her research by looking at the collection: These were happy summer clothes, with circle-skirted dresses, puff-sleeved blue and white shirting, off-the-shoulder necklines, sarongs, tiered skirts, and printed bikini tops—it was her best collection yet, spot-on trend-wise for the season.
But the full story came out in a film of the pilgrimage Jean made to Benin to trace its cultural links with the cotton, crinolined Bahia women’s costumes of Brazil. Centuries back, slave traders forced captives to walk seven times around the Tree of Oblivion, a ritual intended to enforce the forgetting of their culture, before they were thrown onto ships headed for the Americas. “To me, this was one of the worst tortures, because it was beyond their bodies, it was of the mind. But they could not erase it—they re-created everything in Brazil,” said Jean.
The film showed her walking counterclockwise around the Tree of Oblivion monument at the main port in Benin, symbolically undoing the ritual to honor the resilience of the culture’s survival. It was more than mere “inspiration,” though. “The striped fabric you see in the collection I made with the collaboration of hand-weavers in the Republic of Benin,” said Jean. Embroideries designed by craftswomen in Benin were executed by skilled Italian handworkers in her adopted country—a fashion collaboration she credited as being overseen by master craftswoman Eugenie Akouegnon.
Today, Benin’s ethical and sustainable cotton holds the European Ecocert SA certification—and cotton constitutes the country’s biggest export. Both seriously intended and joyful to wear, Stella Jean’s collection stood as an advert shining a own bright light on the thriving potential of Africa today.
