Toussaint Louverture was a talented strategist and soldier who played the Spanish against the British against the United States against the French (his biggest ally, as France had abolished slavery) to create the conditions for sugar-rich Haiti’s independence in 1804 (although by then he had perished from yellow fever). Today he starred on the sweater in Look 6 of this Stella Jean collection. The designer played fast and loose with Louverture’s narrative by presenting him as a woman. In 2019, why not?
This interesting and attractive offering looked at narratives cultural, colonial, and (in that sweater) gendered, and then presented them—as is any author’s privilege—from a subjective point of view. What authenticated that point of view (something especially important in Italian fashion right now) was its anchorage in Jean’s own identity as a Haitian-Italian.
As she said backstage: “In this collection, our bourgeois young lady made an inverse grand tour—the kind of cultural trip made in Europe in the 18th and 19th centuries. But here she starts from tropical destinations like French Polynesia and Haiti, and then she arrives in the Old Europe, which you can see through the still lifes inspired by the Dutch artistic tradition.”
As well as these Willem Kalf–like images, Jean showed faux-naïf representations of Pacific beach scenes informed by Gauguin printed on striped woolen coats. There was a consistent emphasis on intersecting lines of color aka check—itself reflective to this eye of the north-of-the-border cultural touring the English were wont to do in the age of Sir Walter Scott. Patterned beading on belts and slippers looked drawn from various African and South American decorative traditions; lining details on check coats were reminiscent of the Dutch print that remains such a mainstay of African apparel.
Jean said: “This is a suggestion to a new generation that the principal cultural attractions are not all in Europe, and that you don’t have to go to tropical destinations only for the sun and the beach. There are deep cultural, literary, and artistic histories in all the countries that I travel to in Africa or Central America or South America.”
She is, of course, correct. Like a pattern of check over zigzag in one of Jean’s full-skirted jacquard coats, all of these narratives—most especially historical—need to be appreciated for the apparent contradictions and particularities that make them what they are. She added: “I think it’s important to talk about my multiculturalism. I did an interview not long ago, and they said, ‘You know, it is incredible that you are the first black Italian fashion designer!’ And I say that is not a good thing! I want there to be many, many others—I should not be the exception.” Again, correct.

